# Why Not Materialism

## Immateriality of the Mind Argument

The immateriality of the mind is proven through an argument from the impossibility of the contrary.  A person inherently uses his mind to think through problems and make arguments.  This begs the question then: are thoughts immaterial or material?  An materialist would say that the mind is fundamentally material and thoughts are just an emergent property of cells in the brain.  In the materialist's worldview everything is just the interaction of matter/energy. This then begs further questions: what seperates the matter of the brain from the matter of the photons hitting the retina?  What seperates this from the photons being emitted from a light source or the electrons moving through the filament of that light source, and so on?  They are all equally important and necessary for the materialist's experience of the world.  And yet the materialist gives artificial ownership and importance to his arbitrary set of matter over the entire matter-energy dance of the universe.  If he were to take materialism to its logical conclusion then "he" doesn't actually exist because "he" is just an arbitrary set of material components in an ever-changing deterministic universe.  Any arguments "he" makes aren't actually "his".  In fact the act of argumentation is illusary because fundamentally everything is just matter in motion.  Thus if one were to follow through to the logical conclusions of materialism he would find it is inherently self-refuting.  The only other option then is that thoughts and, by extension other immaterial concepts like the self and others, are immaterial by necessity because we find the contrary to be false.

## Ceasar Crossing the Rubicon

